New Table Implementation RFC (#9)
wwnorton/design-system-rfcs: accepted/0001-component-table.md

- `<TableHeader>` - The first row of a table contains cells that act as labels for the columns.
- `<TableHeaderCell>` - A cell in the header row of a table that contains a label for a column.
- `<TableRow>` - A horizontal slice of the table groups related cells.
- `<TableCell>` - A vertical slice of the table groups cells related by the label in the header cell.

## Detailed design

### Table

`<Table>` extends the `React.TableHTMLAttributes<HTMLTableElement>` following are properties:

| Name           | Type      | Description                                                                       | Required | Default     |
| -------------- | --------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | ----------- |
| `stickyHeader` | boolean   | Indicates whether the table header is sticky.                                     | `false`  | `undefined` |
| `className`    | string    | Override or extend existing table style.                                          | `false`  | `undefined` |
| `border`       | boolean   | Indicates whether table with or without border.                                   | `false`  | `undefined` |

> | `sortable`     | boolean   | Sortable header maintain current sort state, which can be asc, desc, or unsorted. | `false`  | `undefined` |

Reviewer: Should these start with an imperative verb to make it more clear that they toggle the feature on/off? For instance, `hasBorder` and `isSortable`.

We're not super consistent about this in our prop naming conventions. As an example: we use `isOpen` instead of `open` quite consistently, but [Badge uses `dot`](https://wwnorton.github.io/design-system/storybook/?path=/docs/badge--docs) instead of something more imperative like `asDot`.

I quite like the usability improvement of imperative props since you can then read the component as a sentence to understand its state: `<Component isOpen> = "Component is open"`, but I'm curious whether you think that warrants the added verbosity.

Author: I hear you. I don't thing it would add that much verbosity, but this comes down to establishing a convention, I'm good with that. I'll update the props and also keep an eye in the future for similar cases.

Reviewer: Sure, let's try out the convention. I don't think we should apply it universally, though. For instance, HTML uses `disabled` for elements that can be disabled, so we probably want to use that instead of `isDisabled`. Clarity/predictability is more important than consistency.

| `variant`      | variant   | Define header style ghost, outline and solid.                                     | `false`  | `solid`     |
| `data`         | TableData | Data to be rendered in the table.                                                 | `false`  | `undefined` |

The `TableData` object allows to define the data of the table where we don't care about its structure and the default structure can be used. This object is made of the following properties:

| Name      | Type                        | Description                       | Required | Default |
| --------- | --------------------------- | --------------------------------- | -------- | ------- |

> | `headers` | Array<TableHeaderData>      | The data that defined the headers | `true`   | ---     |

Reviewer: A tiny style thing: we use `T[]` instead of `Array<T>` everywhere in the design system. It's not a perfect heuristic*, but I like to use the `<>` syntax to signal "this is generic."

\* technically `Array<T>` _is_ a generic, but it's also a primitive data structure in JS.

| `rows`    | Array<Array<TableCellData>> | The data that defined the rows    | `true`   | ---     |

> `TableHeaderData` object properties:

Reviewer: How would you feel about flipping this to `TableDataHeader`? Same for `TableCellData`. Doing that would mean typing `TableData` in IDEs would give you all the related types in your autocomplete.

| Name      | Type      | Description                                                                            | Required | Default     |
| --------- | --------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | ----------- |

> | `element` | ReactNode | The element to render inside the data cell                                             | `true`   | ---         |

Reviewer: Could we avoid "element" for this? I try to avoid it in our APIs since it collides with HTML "elements" and is otherwise too nonspecific for my liking. We could use `children` if we want to be very React-focused. Other options could be `content` or `node` (since it's a `ReactNode` type).

| `sorter`  | Function  | Used for Uncontrolled Sorting, overrides the default sorting function for this column. | `false`  | `undefined` |

`TableCellData` object properties:

| Name      | Type                    | Description                                             | Required | Default     |
| --------- | ----------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | ----------- |
| `value`   | string, boolean, number | The value of the cell                                   | `true`   | ---         |

> | `wrapper` | ReactComponent          | The react component used to wrap the value to render it | `false`  | `undefined` |

Reviewer: Why not use a [render prop](https://react.dev/reference/react/Children#calling-a-render-prop-to-customize-rendering)?

Author: sure, we can make it either:
1. `(value) => ReactComponent`
2. `(value) => ReactNode`

I believe option 2 would make more sense for this

#### Render Example

In its simplest form the **Table Component** can be rendered by feeding data in the `data` prop.

```js
import { Table } from "@wwnds/react";

function YearWrapper({ value }) {
  return <span>{value} years</span>;
}

> const data = [

Reviewer: Can this be an array? The description of the `TableData` above calls it an object and that's what the type definition implies. Or put another way, is the `data` prop's type `TableData` or `TableData[]`?

Author: Oh no! it's an object in fact. This is a typo, during drafting it used to be an array.

					<TableCell>Arnold</TableCell>
					<TableCell>31 years</TableCell>
				</TableRow>
			</TableBody>
		</Table>

	)
}
```

### Subcomponents

#### TableHeader

`<TableHeader>` extends the `React.TableHTMLAttributes<HTMLTableSectionElement>` following are properties:

| Name        | Type   | Description                              | Required | Default     |
| ----------- | ------ | ---------------------------------------- | -------- | ----------- |
| `className` | string | Override or extend existing table style. | `false`  | `undefined` |

#### TableHeaderCell

`<TableHeaderCell>` extends the `React.TableHTMLAttributes<HTMLTableHeaderCellElement>` following are properties:

| Name        | Type                           | Description                                                                            | Required | Default     |
| ----------- | ------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | ----------- |
| `className` | string                         | Override or extend existing table style.                                               | `false`  | `undefined` |

> | `sorter`    | Function                       | Used for Uncontrolled Sorting, overrides the default sorting function for this column. | `false`  | `undefined` |

Reviewer: This needs a more complete type. Is it `Parameters<typeof Array.prototype.sort>[0]` or would we provide some kind of custom call signature?

Author: Since we'll use typescript definitions instead of a table, I'll complete the type accordingly.

`<TableBody>` extends the `React.TableHTMLAttributes<HTMLTableSectionElement>` following are properties:

| Name        | Type   | Description                              | Required | Default     |
| ----------- | ------ | ---------------------------------------- | -------- | ----------- |
| `className` | string | Override or extend existing table style. | `false`  | `undefined` |

#### TableRow

`<TableRow>` extends the `React.TableHTMLAttributes<HTMLTableRowElement>` following are properties:

| Name        | Type   | Description                              | Required | Default     |
| ----------- | ------ | ---------------------------------------- | -------- | ----------- |
| `className` | string | Override or extend existing table style. | `false`  | `undefined` |

#### TableCell

`<TableCell>` extends the `React.TableHTMLAttributes<HTMLTableCellElement>` following are properties:

| Name        | Type   | Description                              | Required | Default     |
| ----------- | ------ | ---------------------------------------- | -------- | ----------- |
| `className` | string | Override or extend existing table style. | `false`  | `undefined` |

### Sorting

> Sorting is enabled by setting the prop `sortable` to `true`. More controls are given to the sorting functionality and they are described in the sections below.

Reviewer: I'm not 100% certain I'm understanding this correctly: sorting is uncontrolled by default, and control it, the developer has to manage the `data` in response to the `onSort` callback?

Author: In controlled mode, the developer will have to sort the data array.

I left this comment as I was drafting, I think I'll remove it since it came out to be a lot simpler that what I originally intended it to be.

}
```

The **default** sorting function uses JS comparison operators, so the [coercion rules for comparison](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Equality#description) apply when 2 values aren't of the same type, all values in a column **SHOULD** be of the same type. To override the sorting function for a column, define the `sorter` property in the `TableHeaderData` object:

```js
import { Table } from "@wwnds/react";

const data = [
  {
    headers: [
      {
        element: "First Name",
        sorter: (a, b) => {
          // ... custom sorting logic
        },
      },
      // ... other headers
    ],
    rows: [
      // ... rows are defined here
    ],
  },
];

function TableExample() {
  return <Table data={data} />;
}
```

#### Uncontrolled Sorting using the composition pattern

The most basic example is as follows:

```js
import { Table } from "@wwnds/react";

function TableExample() {
	return (
		<Table sortable>
			<TableHeader>
				<TableHeaderCell>First Name</TableCell>
				{/* ... other header cells */}
			</TableHeader>
			<TableBody>
                                {/* ... rows */}
			</TableBody>
		</Table>

	)
}
```

> The **default** sorting function uses JS comparison operators, so the [coercion rules for comparison](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Equality#description) apply when 2 values aren't of the same type, all values in a column **SHOULD** be of the same type. To override the sorting function for a column, define the `sorter` prop in the `TableHeaderCell` component:

Reviewer: I think this clarifies my earlier question about the function type. Sounds like this is https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/sort#comparefn.

Author: I think the default sorting function that we'll pass as the compare function would look like this:

```js
function defaultCompare(a, b) {
  if (a > b) return 1;
  if (a < b) return -1;
  return 0
}
```

This depends on the order of the sorting, the function above illustrates ascending order. I think I'll include a section to define the default compare function.

function TableExample() {
	return (
		<Table sortable>
			<TableHeader>
				<TableHeaderCell sorter={(a, b) => { /* ... custom sorting */ }}>First Name</TableCell>
				{/* ... other header cells */}
			</TableHeader>
			<TableBody>
                                {/* ... rows */}
			</TableBody>
		</Table>

	)
}
```

#### Controlled Sorting using the `data` prop

The most basic example is as follows:

```js
import { Table } from "@wwnds/react";

const data = [
    headers: [
      {
        element: "First Name",
        sorted: "asc",
      },
      {
        element: "Last Name",
        sorted: "desc",
      },
      {
        element: "Age",
      },
    ],
    // rows
];

function TableExample() {
  return (
    <Table
      sortable
      onSort={(columnIndex, direction) => {
        /* your custom logic */
      }}
      data={data}
    />
  );
}
```

In `data.headers` the `sorted` property specifies the 3 possible states for the column: _ascending_, _descending_, or _default_ sorting. This will affect the way the sort indicator (button) is displayed.

Since this is the controlled approach, the sorting of the rows is 100% responsibility of the application.

> The `onSort` callback is called when the user clicks on a sortable header. The callback receives the `columnIndex` as defined in `data.headers` and the `direction` of the sort `asc`, `desc`, or `default`.

Reviewer: This is the first mention of the `onSort` prop. Could we add it to the `<Table>` type definition?

  /**
   * Used for Controlled Sorting. When set, the Table component will not manage the sorting state.
   * `onSort` is called when the user clicks on one of the column sorting buttons. It receives
   * the `columnIndex` and the `direction` of the sort `asc`, `desc`, or `default`.
   */
  onSort?: (columnIndex: number, direction: "asc" | "desc" | undefined) => void;

  /**
   * Define header style ghost, outline and solid.
   *
   * @default 'solid'
   */
  variant?: "ghost" | "outline" | "solid";

  /**
   * The data to be rendered in the table.
   */
  data?: TableData;
}
```

The `TableData` object allows to define the data of the table where we don't care about its structure and the default structure can be used. This object is made of the following properties:

```typescript
interface TableData {
  headers: TableDataHeader[];
  rows: TableDataCell[][];
}

type SortableValue = string | number | boolean;

interface TableDataHeader {
  /**
   * The element to render inside the data cell
   */
  children: ReactNode;

  /**
   * Used for Uncontrolled Sorting, overrides the default sorting function for this column.
   */
  sorter?: (a: SortableValue, b: SortableValue) => void;
}

> interface TableDataCell {
>   /**
>    * The value of the cell
>    */
>   value: SortableValue;
> 
>   /**
>    * The react component used to wrap the value to render it
>    */
>   wrapper?: (value: SortableValue) => ReactNode;
> }

Reviewer: This is getting into implementation a bit, but what do you think about making this generic with a default value type of `SortableValue`? While the end result is the same, the semantics are different. As-is, you're saying that the `value` prop's type is `SortableValue` and the `wrapper` function's `value` prop is also `SortableValue`, but you're not giving a guarantee that they're semantically linked. By making it generic, we can fix that.

This then opens the developers to define their own specialized cell types, like `type TableButtonCell = TableDataCell<typeof Button>`, which would expect the contents to always be a `<Button>`.

```suggestion
interface TableDataCell<V = SortableValue> {
  /**
   * The value of the cell
   */
  value: V;

  /**
   * The react component used to wrap the value to render it
   */
  renderCell?: (value: V) => ReactNode;
}
```

		<Table>
			<TableHeader>
				<TableHeaderCell>First Name</TableCell>
				<TableHeaderCell>Last Name</TableCell>
				<TableHeaderCell>Age</TableCell>
			</TableHeader>
			<TableBody>
				<TableRow>
					<TableCell>Marissa</TableCell>
					<TableCell>Keep</TableCell>
					<TableCell>25 years</TableCell>
				</TableRow>
				<TableRow>
					<TableCell>Andrew</TableCell>
					<TableCell>Arnold</TableCell>
					<TableCell>31 years</TableCell>
				</TableRow>
			</TableBody>
		</Table>

	)
}
```

### Subcomponents

#### TableHeader

```typescript
interface TableHeaderProps
  extends React.TableHTMLAttributes<HTMLTableSectionElement> {
  /**
   * Override or extend existing table style.
   */
  className?: string;
}
```

#### TableHeaderCell

```typescript
interface TableHeaderCellProps
  extends React.TableHTMLAttributes<HTMLTableHeaderCellElement> {
  /**
   * Override or extend existing table style.
   */
  className?: string;

  /**
   * Used for Uncontrolled Sorting, overrides the default sorting function for this column.
   */
  sorter?: (a: SortableValue, b: SortableValue) => void;

  /**
   * Used for Controlled Sorting, defines the current sort state of the column.
   */

>   sorted?: "asc" | "desc" | undefined;

Author: I'm not sure about `sorted`, other alternatives were: `direction`, `isSorted`, `sorting`.

What to you think @sh0ji @aferro-wwnorton

Reviewer: I don't think we can use the imperative for this since it's not a boolean. Looking through a handful of [other DS tables](https://component.gallery/components/table/), I'm not seeing an obvious choice.

- [GitHub Primer uses `sortBy`](https://primer.style/components/data-table/react/draft), but they seem to ship a few different compare functions. It feels a bit overloaded to me.
- Atlassian splits sorting into [`sortKey`](https://atlassian.design/components/dynamic-table/code#sortKey) and [`sortOrder`](https://atlassian.design/components/dynamic-table/code#sortOrder). Also not a huge fan of this.
- Shopify Polaris has two tables:
  - [IndexTable](https://polaris.shopify.com/components/tables/index-table?example=index-table-default) pulls sorting entirely up to the top with a bunch of sort-related props
  - [DataTable](https://polaris.shopify.com/components/tables/data-table?example=data-table-sortable) also pulls sorting to the top, but seems to require the user to do the actual sorting (it's controlled).
- And of course, [the APG just uses `aria-sort`](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/table/examples/sortable-table/).

When I don't see an obvious consensus in design systems, I usually just defer to the language that standards use. In this case, that would be `sort?: "ascending" | "descending" | "other"` since that follows [aria-sort](https://w3c.github.io/aria/#aria-sort).

And a few meta-observations:

- Sorting is surprisingly inconsistent across design systems
- Tables are incredibly complex in most design systems (this is less surprising to me, but it's striking to see)
- A lot of design systems ship more than one table, and many ship a "data table": a childless component where everything is controlled through top-level props. This results in a very large surface area, but given how common it is, I suspect that's nearly impossible to avoid.
